Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
intravenous fluids and electrolytes. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss intravenous fluids and electrolytes.
Begin with the body fluid compartments.
Total body water is about sixty per cent of body weight,
divided into two main compartments: the intracellular fluid,
about two-thirds of the total, and the extracellular fluid, about one-third.
The extracellular fluid is further divided into the interstitial fluid,
the larger part, and the intravascular plasma,
about a quarter of the extracellular fluid.
The compartments are separated by membranes that determine how fluids distribute:
the capillary membrane, permeable to water and electrolytes but not to large
molecules, separates plasma from interstitium; the cell membrane,
with its sodium-potassium pump, maintains the difference between intracellular and
extracellular composition.
The distribution of an infused fluid depends on which compartment its constituents
distribute into.
So total body water is divided into intracellular and extracellular fluid,
the latter into interstitial and intravascular,
and understanding these compartments and the membranes between them is the key to
predicting where an infused fluid will go and so its effect.
Describe the crystalloid fluids.
Crystalloids are solutions of water and small molecules — electrolytes or glucose —
that cross the capillary membrane freely,
so they distribute throughout the extracellular fluid.
The common ones differ in composition.
Normal, or zero-point-nine per cent,
saline is sodium chloride isotonic with plasma but with a supraphysiological
chloride content, so large volumes cause a hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis.
The balanced, or buffered, solutions — Hartmann's solution,
or compound sodium lactate, and Plasma-Lyte — have a more physiological electrolyte
composition with a bicarbonate precursor such as lactate or acetate,
avoiding the chloride load.
Five per cent dextrose is glucose in water; the glucose is metabolised,
leaving free water that distributes through all compartments,
so it provides little intravascular expansion and is for free-water replacement,
not resuscitation.
So the crystalloids distribute through the extracellular fluid,
saline carrying a hyperchloraemic acidosis risk,
the balanced solutions being more physiological,
and dextrose providing free water rather than volume.
Describe the colloid fluids and the controversy around them.
Colloids are solutions containing large molecules that, in health,
are retained within the circulation by the capillary membrane,
exerting an oncotic pressure that holds water in the intravascular compartment,
so in theory they expand the plasma volume more efficiently and durably than
crystalloids.
They include the gelatins, human albumin solution, and the starches.
However, their theoretical advantage has not translated into better outcomes,
and there is significant controversy.
The hydroxyethyl starches were found to increase the risk of acute kidney injury
and death in the critically ill and have been largely withdrawn or restricted.
Albumin is expensive and, in trials such as the SAFE study,
broadly equivalent to saline for resuscitation,
with harm suggested in traumatic brain injury.
The gelatins carry a risk of anaphylaxis.
So the colloids expand plasma volume by their oncotic effect but their theoretical
benefit is unproven, the starches are harmful and largely withdrawn,
and albumin is equivalent to crystalloid for most resuscitation — a major
controversy resolved largely in favour of crystalloids.
What does the evidence show about crystalloid versus colloid,
and balanced versus saline?
Large trials have shaped current practice on both questions.
On crystalloid versus colloid, the SAFE study found albumin and saline broadly
equivalent for resuscitation, with possible harm from albumin in brain injury,
and the starch trials showed harm, so crystalloids are now preferred for
resuscitation, colloids having no proven outcome benefit and some harm.
On balanced solutions versus saline,
the concern that the hyperchloraemic acidosis of large-volume saline might cause
renal and other harm was examined in trials such as SMART,
which suggested a small benefit of balanced crystalloids over saline in major
adverse kidney events, leading many to prefer balanced solutions for routine
resuscitation, while saline retains specific indications such as hypochloraemic
states and traumatic brain injury where its higher sodium is useful.
So the evidence favours crystalloids over colloids for resuscitation,
and modestly favours balanced crystalloids over saline for routine use,
with saline reserved for particular indications.
How do you distinguish resuscitation, maintenance and replacement fluids?
These are three distinct purposes requiring different fluids and rates.
Resuscitation fluid is given rapidly, as boluses,
to restore an inadequate circulating volume in shock or hypovolaemia,
using a balanced crystalloid, titrated to the response.
Maintenance fluid provides the daily water and electrolyte needs of the patient who
cannot take them orally, given at a slow continuous rate to match normal losses —
with guideline daily requirements of about twenty-five to thirty millilitres of
water per kilogram, about one millimole per kilogram each of sodium and potassium,
and some glucose to limit ketosis.
Replacement fluid replaces ongoing abnormal losses, such as from vomiting,
diarrhoea, drains or polyuria, matched in volume and composition to the fluid being
lost.
Confusing these — for example giving maintenance-type fluid for resuscitation,
or excess maintenance fluid — causes harm.
So resuscitation restores volume by boluses,
maintenance meets daily needs at a slow rate,
and replacement matches abnormal losses, each distinct in fluid, rate and purpose.
Describe the disturbances of sodium and their correction.
Sodium is the principal extracellular cation and the main determinant of plasma
osmolality, so its disturbances reflect water balance and affect the brain.
Hyponatraemia — a low sodium — causes water to move into cells,
including the brain, causing cerebral oedema with confusion, seizures and,
if severe and acute, death; it has many causes assessed by volume status and
osmolality, and its treatment depends on the cause and chronicity.
Hypernatraemia — a high sodium — usually reflects water deficit,
drawing water from cells.
The cardinal principle in correcting both is that it must be gradual:
correcting chronic hyponatraemia too rapidly risks osmotic demyelination,
a devastating brain injury, and overly rapid correction of hypernatraemia risks
cerebral oedema, so the rate of change of sodium is limited and monitored.
So sodium disturbances reflect water balance and endanger the brain,
and their correction must be gradual and monitored to avoid osmotic demyelination
with hyponatraemia and cerebral oedema with hypernatraemia.
Describe the disturbances of potassium and their management.
Potassium is the principal intracellular cation,
with a narrow extracellular range tightly regulated because it determines the
resting membrane potential and so is critical to cardiac and neuromuscular function.
Hypokalaemia — a low potassium — from losses or intracellular shift,
causes arrhythmias, muscle weakness,
and potentiation of neuromuscular blockers and digoxin toxicity;
it is treated by cautious potassium replacement,
oral or by controlled intravenous infusion, with magnesium correction.
Hyperkalaemia — a high potassium — from impaired excretion, shift out of cells,
or excess intake, is dangerous because it causes cardiac arrhythmias and arrest,
with characteristic electrocardiographic changes;
it is managed by stabilising the myocardium with calcium,
shifting potassium into cells with insulin and glucose and with a beta-agonist,
and removing it from the body.
So potassium disturbances threaten cardiac and neuromuscular function —
hypokalaemia causing arrhythmias and potentiating blockers and digoxin,
treated by cautious replacement, and hyperkalaemia risking arrest,
managed by calcium, insulin-glucose and removal.
What is the place of calcium and magnesium?
Both are important divalent cations with anaesthetic relevance.
Calcium is essential for cardiac and skeletal muscle contraction,
neuromuscular transmission, and as a clotting cofactor;
hypocalcaemia causes tetany, paraesthesiae and prolongation of the QT interval,
and, relevant to massive transfusion, the citrate in stored blood chelates calcium,
so ionised calcium is monitored and replaced; hypercalcaemia causes confusion,
arrhythmia and other effects.
Magnesium is largely intracellular,
important in neuromuscular and cardiac function;
hypomagnesaemia causes arrhythmias and potentiates hypokalaemia and must be
corrected to correct refractory hypokalaemia,
while magnesium is given therapeutically for torsades de pointes, in pre-eclampsia,
in severe asthma, and as an anaesthetic adjunct,
and it potentiates neuromuscular blockade.
So calcium is vital for contraction, transmission and clotting,
monitored in massive transfusion, and magnesium is important for cardiac and
neuromuscular function, corrected to address refractory hypokalaemia and used
therapeutically, with both affecting the QT and magnesium potentiating
neuromuscular blockade.
How should perioperative fluid therapy be approached?
Perioperative fluid therapy aims to maintain normovolaemia and electrolyte balance,
avoiding the harms of both too little fluid — hypovolaemia,
hypoperfusion and organ injury — and too much — oedema, impaired healing,
ileus and cardiorespiratory compromise — since both extremes worsen outcome.
The modern approach, embodied in enhanced-recovery programmes,
avoids prolonged fasting and routine bowel preparation,
allows carbohydrate drinks up to two hours before,
and uses a balanced crystalloid as the default,
giving a near-zero-balance or modestly euvolaemic strategy rather than the liberal
fluid loading of the past.
For major surgery, goal-directed fluid therapy titrates fluid,
and sometimes inotropes, to measured haemodynamic targets such as stroke volume and
its response to a fluid challenge, individualising therapy.
Fluid status is assessed clinically and by dynamic measures of fluid responsiveness.
So perioperative fluid therapy targets normovolaemia with balanced crystalloids,
avoiding both excess and deficit, using goal-directed therapy for major surgery and
dynamic assessment of fluid responsiveness.
How do you assess fluid status and responsiveness?
Assessing whether a patient needs fluid combines clinical,
static and dynamic measures, recognising that the question is not simply whether
the patient is dry but whether giving fluid will increase their cardiac output —
fluid responsiveness.
Clinical assessment uses the history, the heart rate and blood pressure,
capillary refill, peripheral perfusion, urine output and mucous membranes,
and signs of overload such as oedema and pulmonary crepitations.
Static measures such as the central venous pressure are poor predictors of
responsiveness.
The better, dynamic measures assess the change in stroke volume or its surrogates
in response to a preload challenge — the variation in stroke volume or pulse
pressure with positive-pressure ventilation, the response to a passive leg raise,
or the response to a small fluid bolus — a significant increase indicating that the
patient is on the steep part of the Frank-Starling curve and will benefit from
fluid.
So fluid status and responsiveness are assessed by combining clinical signs with
dynamic measures of the stroke-volume response to a preload challenge,
which predict benefit from fluid better than static pressures.
Pull it together: how do you use fluids and manage electrolytes rationally?
I would prescribe fluids deliberately, defining the purpose — resuscitation,
maintenance or replacement — and choosing the fluid and rate accordingly,
using a balanced crystalloid as the default for resuscitation and routine use in
preference to saline and to colloids, which lack proven benefit and,
in the case of the starches, cause harm;
reserving saline for specific indications and dextrose for free-water needs;
and giving maintenance fluid at the guideline daily requirements rather than in
excess.
I would aim for normovolaemia, avoiding both deficit and overload,
using goal-directed therapy and dynamic assessment of fluid responsiveness for
major surgery within an enhanced-recovery approach.
I would monitor and correct electrolytes carefully — sodium gradually to avoid
osmotic demyelination, potassium cautiously,
with attention to calcium in massive transfusion and to magnesium in refractory
hypokalaemia and arrhythmia.
So rational fluid and electrolyte management is purpose-specific,
defaults to balanced crystalloids, targets normovolaemia by dynamic assessment,
and corrects electrolytes carefully and gradually.
Describe the Starling forces and the revised understanding of them.
The movement of fluid across the capillary wall is governed by the Starling forces:
the hydrostatic pressure gradient, which drives fluid out of the capillary,
and the oncotic, or colloid osmotic, pressure gradient,
generated by plasma proteins, which draws it back in,
with the net movement depending on their balance and the permeability of the
membrane.
The classical model held that fluid filtered at the arterial end and was reabsorbed
at the venular end.
The revised understanding emphasises the endothelial glycocalyx,
a layer lining the capillary that is the true semipermeable barrier;
under it lies a protein-poor subglycocalyx space,
so the relevant oncotic gradient is across the glycocalyx,
and in most tissues there is little or no venular reabsorption,
filtered fluid instead returning via the lymphatics.
So the Starling forces of hydrostatic and oncotic pressure govern transcapillary
fluid movement, and the revised model places the glycocalyx as the key barrier with
little venular reabsorption — understanding that explains why infused colloids
expand the plasma less durably than once thought and why excess fluid causes oedema.
Explain the mechanism of hyperchloraemic acidosis from saline.
Large-volume infusion of zero-point-nine per cent saline causes a hyperchloraemic
metabolic acidosis, explicable by the physical chemistry of acid-base,
the Stewart approach.
Saline contains equal concentrations of sodium and chloride,
both much higher in chloride than plasma,
so infusing a large volume raises the plasma chloride disproportionately to the
sodium, reducing the strong ion difference — the difference between the strong
cations and anions in plasma.
Because the strong ion difference is one of the independent determinants of plasma
hydrogen ion concentration, its reduction obliges a rise in hydrogen ion
concentration to maintain electrical neutrality, producing a metabolic acidosis,
specifically hyperchloraemic.
The balanced solutions avoid this by having a lower chloride and including a
metabolisable anion, preserving the strong ion difference.
So the hyperchloraemic acidosis of saline arises because its high chloride load
reduces the plasma strong ion difference,
which by the laws of physical chemistry increases the hydrogen ion concentration —
an acidosis avoided by the lower-chloride balanced solutions.
What are the harms of excessive fluid administration?
Excessive fluid administration, once common,
is now recognised to cause significant harm,
so that both too little and too much fluid worsen outcome.
Fluid overload causes tissue oedema, which impairs the function of organs:
pulmonary oedema impairs gas exchange and may necessitate prolonged ventilation;
gut oedema contributes to ileus and impaired absorption and anastomotic healing;
and tissue oedema impairs wound healing and oxygen diffusion.
It causes weight gain, raises the cardiac workload and can precipitate heart
failure, and contributes to electrolyte disturbance and to a dilutional effect.
In the perioperative and critically ill patient,
a positive fluid balance is associated with increased complications and mortality.
These harms underlie the move from liberal fluid regimens to targeted,
restrictive or zero-balance strategies.
So excessive fluid causes tissue and organ oedema — pulmonary,
gut and wound — impairing gas exchange, gut function and healing,
raising cardiac workload and worsening outcomes,
which is why modern practice avoids fluid excess as well as deficit.
What is the place of hypertonic saline?
Hypertonic saline — sodium chloride at concentrations above the isotonic,
such as the commonly used stronger solutions — has specific uses arising from its
high osmolality.
In the management of raised intracranial pressure and cerebral oedema,
it raises the plasma osmolality, drawing water out of the brain across the intact
blood-brain barrier, reducing brain water and intracranial pressure,
an alternative or complement to mannitol with the advantage that it expands rather
than depletes the intravascular volume.
It is used in the correction of severe symptomatic hyponatraemia,
given in small controlled amounts to raise the sodium just enough to relieve
cerebral oedema, with the crucial caution of avoiding over-rapid correction and
osmotic demyelination.
It has been studied as a small-volume resuscitation fluid.
So hypertonic saline is used to reduce raised intracranial pressure by osmotically
dehydrating the brain while expanding the circulation,
and to treat severe symptomatic hyponatraemia in controlled amounts,
with careful attention to the rate of sodium correction.
Why must maintenance fluids be prescribed carefully, especially in children?
Maintenance fluids must be prescribed carefully because inappropriate prescribing
is a recognised cause of harm, particularly hyponatraemia.
The danger arises from giving too much electrolyte-free water relative to need,
especially with hypotonic fluids, in a patient with raised antidiuretic hormone —
as occurs with stress, surgery, pain and nausea — who cannot excrete the free
water, so the plasma sodium falls, causing potentially fatal hyponatraemic
encephalopathy.
This has been a particular tragedy in children,
in whom the historical use of hypotonic maintenance fluids caused deaths,
leading to guidance to use isotonic,
balanced solutions for maintenance with appropriate glucose and to avoid hypotonic
fluids, and to limit the volume to the calculated requirement.
Volumes and electrolytes are calculated to need, and the sodium monitored.
So maintenance fluids must be prescribed carefully because excess free water,
especially as hypotonic fluid in the patient with raised antidiuretic hormone,
causes dangerous hyponatraemia — a particular hazard in children — now avoided by
using isotonic balanced maintenance fluids in calculated volumes with monitoring.
What does the evidence say about restrictive versus liberal perioperative fluid
regimens?
The question of how much fluid to give for major surgery has been examined in large
trials, refining the move away from the liberal regimens of the past.
A restrictive, or more precisely a balanced, near-zero-balance approach,
avoiding the excess that causes oedema, became favoured.
However, a large trial of restrictive versus liberal fluid in major abdominal
surgery found that an overly restrictive regimen increased the risk of acute kidney
injury compared with a more moderate regimen,
indicating that excessive restriction is also harmful.
The lesson is that the aim is normovolaemia — a moderate,
balanced regimen avoiding both the oedema of excess and the hypoperfusion of too
little — rather than restriction for its own sake, individualised and,
for major surgery, guided by goal-directed therapy.
So the evidence shows that both liberal and overly restrictive fluid regimens are
harmful — excess causing oedema and restriction causing kidney injury — so the goal
is moderate, balanced normovolaemia, guided where possible by goal-directed therapy.
How is fluid managed in the patient with sepsis?
Fluid management in sepsis aims to restore and maintain adequate perfusion in the
vasodilated, often hypovolaemic patient, while avoiding the harm of excess.
Initial resuscitation is with a balanced crystalloid given as boluses — a defined
initial volume guided by guidelines such as those of the Surviving Sepsis Campaign
— titrated to markers of perfusion such as the blood pressure,
lactate clearance and dynamic measures of fluid responsiveness,
rather than to a fixed large volume,
since over-resuscitation worsens oedema and outcome.
A vasopressor, noradrenaline, is started early where fluid alone does not restore
the perfusion pressure, rather than continuing to give ever more fluid.
Balanced crystalloids are preferred to saline and to colloids.
So in sepsis, fluid resuscitation uses balanced crystalloid boluses titrated to
perfusion and fluid responsiveness,
with early noradrenaline rather than continued excessive fluid,
balancing the restoration of perfusion against the harm of fluid overload — a
targeted rather than a maximal approach.
Detail the safe administration of potassium and the correction of hyperkalaemia.
Potassium must be administered with care because too rapid a rise is dangerous to
the heart.
For replacement, potassium is given orally where possible,
or intravenously diluted and at a controlled rate — conventionally not exceeding
around ten millimoles per hour through a peripheral line,
faster only with cardiac monitoring and central access in severe depletion —
because a rapid intravenous bolus can cause fatal arrhythmia.
Concentrated potassium is a high-alert drug requiring strict safeguards against
accidental bolus.
For hyperkalaemia, the management has three components: first,
stabilise the myocardium with intravenous calcium,
which antagonises the membrane effect, when there are electrocardiographic changes;
second, shift potassium into cells temporarily with insulin and glucose,
and with a nebulised beta-agonist; and third,
remove potassium from the body — with measures to increase excretion or,
definitively, dialysis — and stop any potassium source.
So potassium replacement is given slowly at controlled rates because rapid
administration is arrhythmogenic, and hyperkalaemia is managed by myocardial
stabilisation with calcium, intracellular shift with insulin-glucose and a
beta-agonist, and removal from the body.
Give a final integrated account of fluid and electrolyte management.
I would prescribe fluids deliberately, defining the purpose — resuscitation,
maintenance or replacement — and choosing the fluid and rate accordingly.
I would use a balanced crystalloid as the default for resuscitation and routine
use, in preference to saline, whose chloride load causes a hyperchloraemic
acidosis, and to colloids, which lack proven benefit and, as starches, cause harm,
reserving saline and hypertonic saline for specific indications such as raised
intracranial pressure, and dextrose for free-water needs.
I would give maintenance fluid at calculated requirements as isotonic balanced
solution, avoiding the hyponatraemia of excess hypotonic fluid,
especially in children.
I would aim for normovolaemia, avoiding both overload and excessive restriction,
using goal-directed therapy and dynamic assessment of fluid responsiveness for
major surgery.
I would correct electrolytes carefully — sodium gradually to avoid osmotic
demyelination, potassium slowly to avoid arrhythmia,
with attention to calcium in massive transfusion and magnesium in refractory
hypokalaemia.
So management is purpose-specific, defaults to balanced crystalloids,
targets normovolaemia, and corrects electrolytes carefully and gradually.
Distinguish osmolality, osmolarity and tonicity.
These related terms are often confused but are distinct.
Osmolarity is the number of osmotically active particles per litre of solution,
and osmolality the number per kilogram of solvent;
in dilute body fluids the two are nearly equal,
and plasma osmolality is around two hundred and eighty-five to two hundred and
ninety-five milliosmoles per kilogram,
determined chiefly by sodium with its anions, glucose and urea.
Tonicity, however, is the effect of a solution on cell volume,
which depends only on the solutes that cannot cross the cell membrane and so exert
an effective osmotic force across it.
The distinction matters: a solution of five per cent dextrose is iso-osmolar to
plasma, but because the glucose is taken up and metabolised,
it behaves as free water — it is effectively hypotonic,
distributing through all compartments and entering cells.
So osmolality and osmolarity measure particle concentration per kilogram or litre,
while tonicity is the effect on cell volume from membrane-impermeant solutes — the
distinction explaining why iso-osmolar dextrose behaves as hypotonic free water.
How are the body fluid compartments measured?
The volumes of the body fluid compartments are measured by indicator-dilution
techniques, in which a known amount of a marker that distributes into a particular
compartment is given, and, once mixed, its resulting concentration is measured;
the volume of distribution is the dose divided by the concentration.
The marker is chosen for the compartment:
total body water is measured with a substance distributing through all water,
such as deuterium-labelled or tritiated water;
the extracellular fluid with a marker confined to it, such as inulin or a sulphate;
and the plasma volume with a marker confined to the intravascular space,
such as labelled albumin or a dye like Evans blue.
The intracellular volume is derived by subtracting the extracellular from the
total, and the interstitial by subtracting the plasma from the extracellular.
So the compartments are measured by indicator dilution using markers specific to
each — labelled water for total body water, inulin for extracellular fluid,
labelled albumin for plasma — with the intracellular and interstitial volumes
obtained by subtraction, illustrating the dilution principle.
What is the place of blood and blood products as fluids?
Blood and its products are given to replace specific deficits rather than as
general volume expanders, although they do expand the intravascular volume.
Red cells are transfused to restore oxygen-carrying capacity in anaemia or
significant blood loss, to a threshold guided by the patient and the situation,
restrictive thresholds being appropriate for most.
Fresh frozen plasma replaces clotting factors in coagulopathy with bleeding;
cryoprecipitate provides concentrated fibrinogen;
and platelets are given for thrombocytopenia or platelet dysfunction with bleeding.
In major haemorrhage these are given in balanced ratios.
They carry the risks of transfusion — incompatibility, transfusion reactions,
transfusion-related acute lung injury and circulatory overload,
and infection — so they are used for specific indications, not as routine fluids,
guided by laboratory and point-of-care testing.
So blood and blood products replace specific deficits — red cells for oxygen
carriage, plasma, cryoprecipitate and platelets for the components of haemostasis —
expanding volume but used for their specific indications guided by testing,
with the risks of transfusion, rather than as general resuscitation fluids.
How is the free-water deficit calculated and corrected in hypernatraemia?
In hypernatraemia, which reflects a deficit of water relative to sodium,
the volume of water required to correct it — the free-water deficit — can be
estimated to guide replacement.
It is calculated from the total body water and the degree to which the sodium is
raised: the free-water deficit equals the total body water multiplied by the
fractional rise of the measured sodium above the normal sodium — that is,
total body water times the quantity,
the measured sodium divided by the normal sodium, minus one.
The total body water is estimated as a fraction of body weight.
The deficit is then replaced with water,
enterally or as intravenous dextrose or hypotonic fluid,
alongside any volume resuscitation needed for circulatory compromise.
Crucially, the correction must be gradual — limiting the fall in sodium per day —
to avoid cerebral oedema from too-rapid correction.
So the free-water deficit is estimated as total body water times the fractional
excess of the sodium, replaced with water gradually to avoid the cerebral oedema of
over-rapid correction of hypernatraemia.
What is the third-space concept and is it still valid?
The third-space concept was the traditional idea that, during major surgery,
a substantial volume of fluid is sequestered into a non-functional compartment — a
notional third space distinct from the intracellular and extracellular fluids — in
traumatised and oedematous tissue and the gut,
and that this loss had to be replaced with large additional volumes of fluid,
which justified the liberal intraoperative fluid regimens of the past.
This concept has been largely discredited:
careful studies have not demonstrated such a distributional loss,
and the apparent need for large volumes is now attributed to other factors and to
the consequences of the excessive fluid itself.
The recognition that the third space does not exist as described,
together with evidence of the harms of fluid overload,
underpins the modern shift to more restrained, balanced fluid regimens.
So the third-space concept — a large surgical sequestration of fluid requiring
generous replacement — is now considered invalid, its rejection,
with the evidence of the harms of excess fluid,
supporting the move away from liberal towards balanced, normovolaemic fluid therapy.
Describe the principles of goal-directed fluid therapy.
Goal-directed fluid therapy is the individualised titration of fluid,
and where needed inotropes or vasopressors, to defined physiological targets,
rather than to fixed formulae, aiming to optimise the cardiac output and oxygen
delivery while avoiding both hypovolaemia and fluid overload.
Its principle rests on the Frank-Starling relationship:
a fluid challenge — a small bolus — is given and the response of the stroke volume,
or a surrogate, is measured; a significant rise indicates the patient is
preload-responsive, on the steep part of the curve,
and will benefit from more fluid, while a minimal rise indicates they are not,
and further fluid would only cause overload.
Dynamic indices — stroke-volume and pulse-pressure variation,
and the passive-leg-raise response — guide this,
often using minimally invasive cardiac-output monitoring.
It is applied particularly in major surgery and the high-risk patient.
So goal-directed fluid therapy titrates fluid and, if needed,
inotropes to stroke-volume and dynamic targets using the fluid-challenge response,
optimising cardiac output while avoiding overload — an individualised,
physiology-based approach for major surgery.
Explain colloid osmotic pressure and the role of albumin.
Colloid osmotic, or oncotic, pressure is the osmotic pressure exerted by the large
plasma proteins, which, being too large to cross the healthy capillary membrane
freely, are retained in the plasma and draw water into the intravascular space,
opposing the hydrostatic pressure that drives it out — a key Starling force
maintaining the plasma volume.
Albumin, the most abundant plasma protein,
generates the majority of the colloid osmotic pressure,
and it also transports many substances, including drugs, hormones and bilirubin,
and acts as a buffer.
Hypoalbuminaemia, as in liver disease, nephrotic syndrome,
malnutrition and the capillary leak of critical illness,
lowers the colloid osmotic pressure, contributing to oedema,
and alters the binding and free fraction of albumin-bound drugs.
Albumin solution is used as a colloid in specific situations,
though not superior to crystalloid for general resuscitation.
So colloid osmotic pressure is the water-retaining osmotic force of the plasma
proteins, generated chiefly by albumin, which also transports drugs and buffers;
its reduction in hypoalbuminaemia causes oedema and alters drug binding — central
to understanding fluid distribution.
How is fluid managed in major burns?
Major burns cause a massive loss of fluid,
from the burned surface and through a generalised increase in capillary
permeability, leading to profound hypovolaemia — burns shock — so large-volume
fluid resuscitation is needed, guided by a formula and titrated to response.
The volume is estimated from the body weight and the percentage of body surface
area burned using a formula such as the Parkland formula,
which calculates the crystalloid — a balanced solution — to be given over the first
twenty-four hours, with half in the first eight hours from the time of the burn,
then adjusted.
Crucially, the formula is only a starting estimate,
and the resuscitation is titrated to physiological endpoints,
principally the urine output, to avoid both under-resuscitation and the
over-resuscitation — fluid creep — that causes oedema and compartment syndromes.
So major burns require large-volume balanced crystalloid resuscitation estimated
from the burn size and body weight by a formula such as Parkland,
then titrated to the urine output to avoid both under- and over-resuscitation — a
formula-guided but response-titrated approach.
Detail maintenance fluid requirements, including the paediatric calculation.
Maintenance fluid replaces the normal ongoing losses — urine,
and insensible losses from skin and respiration — of the patient who cannot drink.
For adults, the daily requirements are approximately twenty-five to thirty
millilitres of water per kilogram, about one millimole per kilogram each of sodium
and potassium, and around fifty to a hundred grams of glucose to limit ketosis,
given as an isotonic balanced solution to avoid hyponatraemia.
For children, the hourly water requirement is classically calculated by the
four-two-one rule: four millilitres per kilogram per hour for the first ten
kilograms of body weight, two millilitres per kilogram per hour for the next ten
kilograms, and one millilitre per kilogram per hour for each kilogram thereafter.
Importantly, isotonic rather than hypotonic fluids are used in children for
maintenance to prevent dangerous hyponatraemia,
with glucose as needed and close monitoring.
So maintenance provides daily water, sodium,
potassium and glucose — about twenty-five to thirty millilitres per kilogram in
adults, and by the four-two-one rule per hour in children — given as isotonic
balanced fluid to avoid hyponatraemia, especially in children.
Give a final integrated account of the rational ideal of fluid and electrolyte
prescribing.
I would treat fluid as a drug, prescribed deliberately with a defined purpose —
resuscitation, maintenance or replacement — a chosen agent, volume and rate,
and a planned reassessment, recognising that there is no single ideal fluid and
that both deficit and excess cause harm.
I would default to a balanced crystalloid for resuscitation and routine use,
in preference to saline, whose chloride load causes a hyperchloraemic acidosis,
and to colloids, which lack proven benefit and, as starches, cause harm;
reserve saline, hypertonic saline, dextrose,
blood products and specific replacements for their indications;
and give maintenance as isotonic balanced fluid in calculated amounts,
avoiding the hyponatraemia of excess hypotonic fluid.
I would target normovolaemia, avoiding both overload and over-restriction,
using goal-directed therapy and dynamic assessment of fluid responsiveness for
major surgery, and correct electrolytes carefully and gradually, mindful of sodium,
potassium, calcium and magnesium.
So the rational ideal is to prescribe fluid as a drug — purposeful,
balanced-crystalloid-default, normovolaemia-targeted, dynamically guided,
and electrolyte-careful.
How do you assess the severity of dehydration and hypovolaemia?
The severity of fluid loss is assessed clinically, supported by investigations,
recognising that signs appear progressively as the deficit grows.
Mild dehydration may show only thirst and dry mucous membranes; as it worsens,
there is reduced skin turgor, sunken eyes, tachycardia,
and reduced urine output with concentrated urine;
and severe hypovolaemia produces hypotension — initially postural,
then supine — a thready rapid pulse,
cool peripheries with prolonged capillary refill,
and ultimately a reduced conscious level and shock.
In children, reduced wet nappies, a sunken fontanelle and the degree of these signs
grade the loss.
Investigations support this — a raised urea and haematocrit,
a metabolic acidosis with a raised lactate indicating hypoperfusion,
and the dynamic measures of fluid responsiveness in the monitored patient.
So dehydration and hypovolaemia are graded by progressive clinical signs — from
thirst and dry membranes through tachycardia and reduced turgor to hypotension,
poor perfusion and shock — supported by a raised urea,
haematocrit and lactate and by dynamic measures,
guiding the urgency and volume of replacement.
How is fluid managed in diabetic ketoacidosis specifically?
Fluid management is the first priority in diabetic ketoacidosis,
in which there is a large total-body water and sodium deficit from the osmotic
diuresis and vomiting.
Resuscitation begins with intravenous balanced crystalloid, or saline,
to restore the circulating volume and correct the profound dehydration,
given more rapidly at first if there is shock, then at a corrected rate.
As the glucose falls with insulin, glucose is added to the fluids to allow the
insulin to continue clearing the ketones without causing hypoglycaemia.
Crucially, potassium must be added to the fluids and carefully monitored,
because the total-body potassium is depleted and the insulin and the correction of
acidosis drive potassium into cells,
so the level falls and must be replaced once it is not high and urine flows.
The osmolality is corrected gradually.
So in diabetic ketoacidosis, fluid resuscitation with crystalloid corrects the
large deficit, glucose is added as the level falls to allow continued insulin,
and potassium is replaced and closely monitored — fluids,
insulin and potassium together, with gradual correction.
What constitutes the concept of an ideal intravenous fluid?
The concept of an ideal intravenous fluid is a useful framework,
even though no single fluid is ideal for all purposes.
An ideal fluid would have a composition close to that of the body fluid it is
intended to replace — for plasma replacement,
an electrolyte content and osmolality matching plasma,
with a physiological strong ion difference avoiding acid-base disturbance,
hence the appeal of the balanced solutions over saline.
It would distribute predictably to the intended compartment and remain there
appropriately, expanding the plasma efficiently for resuscitation without causing
oedema.
It would be free of harmful effects — no nephrotoxicity,
coagulopathy or accumulation, in contrast to the starches; non-allergenic,
unlike the gelatins; metabolised to harmless products; and it would be cheap,
stable and readily available.
The balanced crystalloids approach this ideal for most purposes,
which is why they are the default.
So an ideal fluid would match the target compartment's composition with a
physiological acid-base profile, distribute predictably,
be free of toxicity and allergy, and be cheap and stable — a standard the balanced
crystalloids most nearly meet, justifying their default use.
Thank you. That concludes a thorough and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Total body water (~60% of weight) is intracellular (two-thirds) and
extracellular (one-third; interstitial plus intravascular plasma);
the distribution of an infused fluid depends on which compartment its constituents
enter, which predicts its effect.
Second, Crystalloids distribute through the extracellular fluid — 0.9% saline
carries a hyperchloraemic acidosis risk, balanced solutions (Hartmann's,
Plasma-Lyte) are more physiological,
and 5% dextrose provides free water not volume;
colloids expand plasma by oncotic effect but lack proven benefit — starches are
harmful and largely withdrawn, albumin is equivalent to saline for most
resuscitation (SAFE).
Third, Evidence favours crystalloids over colloids for resuscitation and modestly
favours balanced crystalloids over saline (SMART),
with saline reserved for specific indications;
distinguish resuscitation (boluses to restore volume), maintenance (daily needs:
~25–30 mL/kg water, ~1 mmol/kg each Na and K,
some glucose) and replacement (matching abnormal losses).
Fourth, Sodium disturbances reflect water balance and endanger the brain — correct
gradually to avoid osmotic demyelination (hyponatraemia) or cerebral oedema
(hypernatraemia); potassium is critical to cardiac/neuromuscular function —
hypokalaemia causes arrhythmias and potentiates blockers/digoxin,
hyperkalaemia risks arrest (treat with calcium, insulin-glucose, removal).
5. Calcium is vital for contraction,
transmission and clotting (monitor in massive transfusion — citrate chelation);
magnesium is corrected for refractory hypokalaemia and used therapeutically
(torsades, pre-eclampsia, asthma) and potentiates neuromuscular blockade.
Perioperatively target normovolaemia with balanced crystalloids,
avoiding excess and deficit, using goal-directed therapy and dynamic
fluid-responsiveness assessment.
Thank you. That concludes the station.